# CLI 101
* [Overview](#overview)
* [Intro](#intro)
* [Warm-up](#warm-up)
* [So what exactly is a command?](#so-what-exactly-is-a-command)
* [The terminal is NOT the shell (program)](#the-terminal-is-not-the-shell-program)
* [Bash tips](#bash-tips)
* [Redirection and Pipes](#redirection-and-pipes)
* [Command Options](#command-options)
* [Learn to Read The F***ing Manual](#learn-to-read-the-fing-manual)
* [Playing with `curl`, and understanding the Web](#playing-with-curl-and-understanding-the-web)
* [Mini-project](#mini-project)
* [| Command | Description|](#-command--description)

## Overview

CLI 101 will cover the following topics:

* A short introduction to the terminal, command line interface and the Bash language
* Basic navigational commands
* Manipulating files and directories
* Terminology and concepts: what is a Bash command, and the difference between a terminal and a shell
* IO Redirection and Pipes
* Command options
* Manpages
* Using `curl`
* How the Web works

## Intro

Time to learn some basic shell commands and familiarize yourself with working with a CLI (command line interface)!

Ruby is not the only language you'll be getting a taste of in this workshop.
When you use your CLI/shell/terminal (emulator)/command prompt, you are actually using a programming language called **Bash**.
Bash is also a called a *command language* (there are others), and is a domain-specific language for working with the CLI.
Different languages for different things!

## Warm-up

(*note: the `$` sign in the snippets below indicate that you should type the code in your CLI*)

Let's start with the traditional Hello World:

```bash
$ echo "Hello World"
```

Congratulations! You've got your first taste of Bash. Unfortunately printing "Hello World" to your screen isn't terribly useful.
Let's look at some basic *Bash commands* that allow us to do cooler things.

Try running the following commands:

```bash
$ ls
```
This lists all the files and directories in your current directory (which should be `~/workspace`).
You should see Cloud9's default `README.md` file.

```bash
$ cd ..
```
This changes your *current working directory* to the parent directory (indicated by the `..`). You can check the name of your current/present working directory like so:

```bash
$ pwd
```

Your filesystem is basically a tree, so imagine stepping up one branch up when you did the `cd ..`.

In fact, let's use the `tree` command to visualize exactly that.
You should now be in the `~` directory
(note: `~` is actually a shorthand for your *home directory*. In more technical (Bash) terms, it expands into the path to your home directory. Test it out by running `echo ~`)
Now run:

```bash
$ tree
```

This will list all the directories and files under your current directory, expanding any nested directories recursively, in a pretty format.

> **Side note on terminology**
> Maybe you're a little confuse by all the terms about "files" and "directories" and changing directories and the current working directory etc.
> But it's really the same that you've been doing all the while with your GUI.
> You open folders (directories), move from one folder to another, and open files.
> You're actually doing the same thing here, but with the CLI.

Other than just listing our files and directories, we can create new ones.
Move back into your workspace directory:

```bash
cd workspace
```

Now create a new directory (you can follow the below exactly, or name it whatever you want, ie. replace `new_dir` with your desired name)

```bash
$ mkdir new_dir
```

This should create `new_dir` in your current directory (which should be `~/workspace`)
Let's list our current directory again:

```bash
$ ls
```

You should now see `new_dir` in the output of `ls`.

> **Question**
> The full path of your current directory is `~/workspace`,
> and you created `new_dir` in `~/workspace`, so the
> full path of `new_dir` should be...?

What's inside `new_dir`? We can pass it as an *argument* to the `ls` command:

```bash
$ ls new_dir
```

This tells `ls` to list the files and directories in the specified directory (`new_dir`). As we have seen, if you don't pass any argument to `ls`, it lists the current directory by default. Since `new_dir` was newly created, it is empty, and you shouldn't see any output from the `ls` command.

You can actually use `ls` not just on directories, but also on normal files:

```bash
$ ls README.md
```

This will just output the name of the file, which isn't terribly useful. But we will see later on when `ls`ing a file can tell us more useful things.

You've seen how to create a new directory, so what about creating new files? Let's add some files to `new_dir`:

```bash
$ touch new_dir/one.txt new_dir/two.txt
```

This will create two new empty files in `new_dir` called `one.txt` and `two.txt`. You can open them in your text editor, add a few words and lines, and save your changes.

Now when you:

```
$ ls new_dir
```

your two new files should show up in the output.

Great! We're almost done with our warmup, but one last thing is -- how do we output the contents of a file? Turns out we can do:

```
$ cat new_dir/one.txt
```

(`cat` here stands for con*cat*enate, but you can believe that it was named after the animal if you so prefer.)

## So what exactly is a command?
You've been playing around with some Bash commands and maybe you're now thinking, "What *exactly* is a command? I seem to be able to type some magical letters on my screen and hit enter and magical things happen."

Actually, this is a slightly tricky question to answer, because there are *two types* of Bash commands (!!!) You have actually been using a mixture of both in the warm-up exercise.

The first type are **shell builtins**. As the name suggests, these are *built into the shell*. But what does that actually mean? Remember, your (Bash) shell is *just a program*. It's a bunch of code a bunch of smart people wrote that's running (as a process) on your machine. Commands which are shell builtins are part of that bunch of code inside the shell program. They are implemented directly inside the shell program itself.

This suggests that there are commands whose code is not part of the shell program, ie. they are implemented *external to* the shell program. These are (whaddya know) called **external commands**. These are basically also programs (ie. a bunch of code a bunch of smart people wrote), but are separate from the shell program. This means that, when you execute an external command, the shell program has to go and look for wherever the other program is stored and load it up as a separate process.

> **Sidenote on terminology**
> You hear me talking about *programs* and *processes*, and maybe you're wondering, "What's the difference?"
> Think of a program as a static entity, just a bunch of code stored in a file somewhere (you will be writing Ruby programs very soon!)
> Processes on the other hand are dynamic - an instance of a program that is currently running, storing its state of execution.
> For example, when you open your browser, it is running as a process on your machine. The number of open tabs it has is an example of its state.
> You can run several instances of the same program. For example, you can open two terminal windows, which will run the shell program as two separate processes.

We're not trying to learn to be Bash wizards, but just to attain some basic Bash literacy, so you don't really have to care whether a command you're using is a *shell builtin* or an *external command*. The important thing to realize is that these commands, and the shell itself, *are just programs*. They are **a bunch of code that other people wrote, which you are utilizing**. Even as you learn how to be a programmer and how to write your own code, most of the time, or even all of the time, you will also be *utlizing or relying on code written by others*. For example, when you learn how to build web applications with Rails, you will be utilizing the Rails framework. What exactly is this framework? Again, it's a bunch of code a bunch of smart people wrote. Of course, there is a learning curve associated with using a bunch of code written by other people, but it is usually much much easier than trying to build everything from scratch yourself. **Learning how to learn how to utilize other people's code is a very important programming skill**. It will come with due practice ;)

> **Extras**
> If you're interested in digging deeper about the 'shell builtin' vs 'external command' thing, you can try running the following in your shell
> ```bash
> $ type cd
> $ type cat
> ```
> `type` will basically tell you the type of command passed to it
> Most of the useful external commands such as `ls` and `cat` are actually part of [GNU coreutils](http://www.gnu.org/software/coreutils/manual/html_node/index.html)
> Finally, check out [this excellent StackExchange answer on the difference between shell builtins and external commands](https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/11454/what-is-the-difference-between-a-builtin-command-and-one-that-is-not)

## The terminal is NOT the shell (program)

Wait, what??? I agree, this is a very confusing point. In common parlance you will hear people using these terms interchangeably, and I myself have done so in certain parts of this tutorial. What do I mean by suddenly saying, "The terminal is NOT the shell". Am I just trolling you?

Not at all. (Or, well, maybe just a little ;)) But allow me to be pedantic, because I don't just want to bombard you with terminology and information, but help you form proper mental models of the underlying concepts. (Also, because this has always been confusing to me, and I want to make it clear to myself!)

The terminal, more precisely called a *terminal emulator* (because it emulates the [real computer terminals of yore](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_terminal)), is a graphical program separate from the shell program. The terminal emulator is the program that handles the graphics (the window, text display) and input/output (IO). Usually when you open a terminal emulator, it will immediately run the shell program as well (in our case, the Bash shell), the program that allows you to do `cd` and `ls` and so forth. But because the terminal emulator and the shell program are pretty much always run together, people tend to conflate them.

There are actually many different terminal emulator programs, and many different shell programs. On our Ubuntu Linux system, we happen to be using the Gnome Terminal terminal emulator, and the Bash shell program (the Bash language is the language you use to interact with a Bash shell). These are the defaults on Ubuntu. Other systems may differ. For instance, macOS has a terminal emulator called iTerm2, but by default it also runs a Bash shell. Bash is by far the most common shell program that comes packaged on most *nix systems.

I keep saying "by default", which means that if you don't like the defaults of Gnome Terminal and Bash, you can switch either out for something else. For example, you can get Gnome Terminal to start a Zsh shell, or a Fish shell (etymology tidbit: they all end with 'sh', which stands for 'shell'). Now I am no shell wizard, and have never tried any of this out myself, but good to know that the possibility exists. For now, we can be happy that the defaults work out of the box.

## Bash tips

Before moving on to some more Bash commands, here's a few handy things to know when you're working in a Bash terminal:

* You can autocomplete command names or file/directory names with `Tab`
    Try typing in `ca` and pressing `Tab`; Bash should show a list of commands that start with the letters `ca`. Suppose you would like to run the `calendar` command. You can type up to `cale` and `Tab` and Bash will complete the rest for you.
    Now try typing `ls R` and `Tab`. Bash should autocomplete this to `ls README.md`. You can see how this will be very handy for very long file or directory names!

* Bash actually keeps track of all the commands you execute (up to a certain upper limit). This is your *command history*. You can scroll through your history of commands with the up and down arrow keys. This is very handy when you want to exactly repeat a previous command, or maybe modify it a little before using it.
    Try this out!

* You can use `!!` (and `Enter`, of course) to execute your previous command. This is no different from pressing the up arrow (and `Enter`), so you may or may not find this handy.

* Sometimes, a command you want to re-execute is buried pretty far back in your history, and you don't want to slog through all those up arrows. Bash has a very handy feature called *reverse intelligent search*, which will search backwards in your history based on a string (ie. some letters or characters) you give it. Use `Ctrl-R` to start it. You should see something like:

```bash
(reverse-i-search)`':
```

Now type something that's part of a previous command you executed and you will see how Bash tries to find the closest command in your history that matches the string.

> **Side note on terminology**
> You notice I keep talking about "strings".
> This is actually a bit of programmer jargon, so it might seem confusing at first, but it's really pretty straightforward.
> In programming, a string is basically a sequence of characters (it is a particular type of data, or datatype).
> So things like "Hello world", or whatever you typed for reverse-i-search, you will hear people referring to them as strings.
> We will learn more about strings and datatypes when we learn about Ruby.

Play around with `reverse-i-search` a little, then, when you want to exit, press `Ctrl-C` -- **this is also the general keybinding for exiting any program running on your terminal** which doesn't naturally finish execution and exit on its own (More technically, `Ctrl-C` sends an *interrupt signal*, denoted by `SIGINT`, which is handled by the operating system and terminates the program).

## Redirection and Pipes

So far, the stuff we've been doing with Bash could have been done easily with GUI. You haven't experienced the real power of the CLI yet. Let's do something more useful. First, make sure you're back in your workspace directory:

```bash
$ cd ~/workspace
```

Now instead of creating empty files and opening them in our text editor, we can directly create a file with some text, or write extra stuff to the end of an existing file (we call that *appending* to the file), or even overwrite an existing file completely, all from the CLI.

First, let's try overwriting the `one.txt` file we created previously, with a string:

```bash
$ echo "Learning Bash is fun!" > new_dir/one.txt
```
(Remember, instead of typing out the path to `one.txt` line by line, you can use `Tab` to autocomplete!)

Now check the contents of `one.txt`:

```bash
$ cat new_dir/one.txt
```

You should see `Learning Bash is fun!` in the output.

The `>` operator is used for something called *output redirection*. This simply means that, while the `echo "Your string here"` command normally outputs `Your string here` to your screen (ie. prints it on your screen, or more technically, outputs it to `STDOUT`, or *standard output*), with the `> new_dir/one.txt` you are *channelling that output into the file `one.txt` instead*.

A lot of times we don't want to completely overwrite a file, but just add something to the end. We can do this with `>>` (*notice it's two `>`s, not one!*). Let's try adding the following string to `one.txt`:

```bash
$ echo "And learning Ruby will be even more fun!" >> new_dir/one.txt
```

Now check the contents of `one.txt` (you should remember the command by now!)
You should get something like:

```
Learning Bash is fun!
And learning Ruby will be even more fun!
```

We've seen a little bit of IO redirection in play -- we redirected the output of a command into a file. Now, what if I want to redirect the output of a command *into another command*? This is very common -- you can do some very powerful things by chaining alot of small commands together.

For example, say we want to list only the lines in the file that contain the word "Bash". Let's add a few more lines to `one.txt` first. You can do this in the text editor, or even better, use the shell:

```bash
$ echo "You don't have to know the ins and outs of Bash to be an effective Ruby programmer" >> new_dir/one.txt
$ echo "But you should have some basic Bash literacy" >> new_dir/one.txt
$ echo "It can look like a whole bunch of black magic, but we all were there once" >> new_dir/one.txt
```

Now let's try to get only the lines that contain "Bash":

```bash
$ cat new_dir/one.txt | grep Bash
```

Two things are going on here: first, we are using the `|` operator, called a *pipe*. It is so called because we are *piping* the output of our first command `cat new_dir/one.txt` into another command `grep Bash`. We know what `cat new_dir/one.txt` outputs, right? It's just the contents of `one.txt`. Second, what does the `grep Bash` command actually do? The command itself is `grep`, and we are passing it the output of `cat new_dir/one.txt` and the string `Bash` as arguments. `grep` basically takes the first argument and tries to find any lines in it that have some parts matching the second argument, called the *pattern*. Again: `grep` takes the contents of `one.txt`, checks which lines contain the string `Bash`, and outputs those lines.

You should get something like:

```
Learning Bash is fun!
You don't have to know the ins and outs of Bash to be an effective Ruby programmer
But you should have some basic Bash literacy
```

Your terminal will even highlight the matching parts (the word `Bash`). In effect, we are able to *filter* a file for contents that we're interested in! Now try (and make sure you understand every line):

```bash
$ cd ~
$ tree | grep .txt
$ tree | grep .md
```

Of course `grep` is not the only command you can pipe to. Play around with the following (*note: I am denoting comments in the snippets below with a `#`. Do not actually type them in*):

```bash
$ cd ~/workspace
$ cat new_dir/one.txt | shuf # try running this command several times, and see whether you can figure out what shuf does
$ cat new_dir/one.txt | head -n 1 # try changing the number 1 to something else
$ cat new_dir/one.txt | tail -n 1 # again, try changing the number 1 to something else
```

> **Etymology Tidbit**
> So far the names of all the commands we've used all make some kind of sense.
> At least, they seem like English words, just written by lazy people.
> But what the heck is `grep` supposed to mean?
> [Your guess is as good as mine.](http://www.vicchi.org/2010/08/01/grepping-and-grokking-the-etymology-of-grep/)

## Command Options

Remember when we tried to do:

```bash
$ ls README.md
```
and all it did was return `README.md`? That was pretty boring wasn't it? Thankfully, commands are actually *highly configurable through various options* you can pass it. This means you can pass `ls` some options that will change its behaviour. The most handy is the `-l` option, short for *long listing format*:

```bash
$ ls -l README.md
```

Note how we pass in option with a hyphen `-` in front. Usually options are specified either with a `-` or a `--`. You can see that we got much more useful information from `ls` this time, such as file permissions, the owner name, the file size (in bytes), and the time of last modification.

You can pass more than one option as well. For example, it's common to use both the `-l` and `-h` options together:

```bash
# compare the outputs of the following two commands
$ ls -l materials
$ ls -lh materials
$ ls -l -h materials
```
You will notice that the last two commands above actually do the same thing. That is, both are valid ways of specifying options for `ls`.

## Learn to Read The F***ing Manual

Pardon my French (or, really, [the Internet's French](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RTFM)), but you need to learn how to RTFM to be an effective self-learner (which is what most/all effective programmers are). You can always go to the great wide web in search for answers, but the Bash shell offers you a way for checking what various commands do if you aren't sure. Introducing the `man` command:

```bash
$ man ls
```

This brings up the manpage for the `ls` command, which describes what it does and the various options you can pass it. Now, to be fair, manpages can look very intimidating, sometimes even incomprehensible. You don't need to read the whole damn thing, but you need to learn how to skim to pick out the bits you need. Say, for example, you want to learn how to invoke a command, or what a certain option does. Reading manpages is also a skill that needs to be developed. Again, practice :)

But, let's start with some basics. First, you need to know how to navigate a manpage. Of course you could use your mouse and trackpad to scroll, or your arrow keys to move up and down, but if you don't like to keep moving your hand around you can also use `j` for scrolling down and `k` for scrolling up. More importantly, most of the times you want to search for a specific term, say, a certain option. Do this by pressing `/` and typing in your search term, then hit enter. You should jump to the first result. To go the next result, press `N`. To go back to the previous result, `Shift + N`. To jump straight to the top, use `gg`. Straight to the bottom, use `Shift-G` Finally, you can exit the manpage with `q`.

Play around. Try and read the manpages of some of the commands you've used so far: `man ls`, `man cat`, `man grep`, `man shuf`. Try something like `man cd`. What do you get? The reason for this is that `cd` is a shell builtin. If you want to figure out what shell builtins do, use `help`, like `help cd`.

## Playing with `curl`, and understanding the Web

We're nearing the end of our CLI/Bash 101, but I want to introduce you to one last command: `curl`. What does it do? Well, by now you should know how to find out:

```bash
$ man curl
```

If you read past the first line of the description you may start getting really confused (DICT? FTP? LDAP? POP3? WHAAT??? Fret not. I hardly know anything about most of these protocols either. But at least HTTP and HTTPS should sound familiar. If it's not, don't worry, we'll be talking more about it later in the workshop!). But really, the first line is enough -- you can use `curl` to fetch data from any web server on the Internet. That is precisely one big thing your web browser does, actually -- fetch stuff from the Internet.

Let me take this opportunity to talk a little about how the Web (and Internet) works.

Consider what happens when you visit `www.google.com` with your browser. `www.google.com` is what is known as a *domain name*. It is a human-readable name that maps to several addresses of web servers connected to the Internet (these addresses are called IP addresses; IP stands for *Internet Protocol*). Web servers are basically computers connected to the Internet which store a bunch of files and run a special program (a server program) that waits for other computers (clients) to request files from it, and sends those files to them over the Internet. So when you visit `www.google.com` in your browser, your browser acts as a *client program* that makes a request to one of the servers whose IP address is mapped to the domain name `www.google.com` (figuring out which IP address(es) map to a given domain name is known as *name resolution*. This is a significant part of the infrastructure of the Internet today). The server with that IP address receives the request from your browser, and replies by sending over a bunch of information, the most important being the HTML document of Google's home page. Once your browser has fetched that data, it proceeds to parse it and display it nicely on your screen.

I seem to have elided over something. I talked about *domain names*, but I'm sure you might be wondering, isn't `www.google.com` a URL? Like, the thing I type into my browser search bar? Well...almost. Notice how when you type `www.google.com` in your browser search bar, it actually gets expanded into something like `https://www.google.com` (and likely even more stuff). This whole thing here, then, is, strictly speaking, the URL (*Uniform Resource Locator*), and not just the `www.google.com`. The URL, as its name suggests, uniquely identifies the location of some web resource (usually, a HTML file) on the Internet (or any computer network, for that matter). [A URL comprises different parts](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identifier#Syntax), and one of these parts happens to be the domain name. The `https` part is the *URL scheme* and in this case means that our browser is using the HTTPS (Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure) to communicate with the web server (note that a URL scheme doesn't always correspond to a protocol; it just specifies how to remaining part of the URL should be interpreted).

> **Sidenote on 'protocol'**
> You hear a lot about this protocol stuff when people talk about the Internet.
> No wonder, because the Internet is basically a whole bunch of machines trying to talk to one another. How can we make all these different machines intelligible to one another?
> Enter communication protocols, which are sets of rules and standards that govern how computers talk to one another.
> These rules and standards are drafted, debated over, deprecated, reworked, and improved upon by engineers and computer scientists who are part of various standards committees.
> The set of protocols that govern Internet communications is called the TCP/IP suite. Some of the more common protocols you will encounter from this suite will be TCP, IP and HTTP (along with HTTPS).

Okay, that was a lot of stuff to digest. But hopefully the Web is starting to seem a lot less magical (okay, I admit, it's still pretty damn magical). But let us return to `curl`. `curl` does exactly what your browser does, minus the parsing and rendering of the server's response. It justs spits the response out as a bunch of text on your terminal, so you can see the raw HTML:

```bash
$ curl -L www.google.com
```

(Notice we didn't actually specify the full URL with the `http` or `https` part. Just like your browser, `curl` tries to guess which scheme it should use, and defaults to `http`.)

> **Sidenote on the -L option**
> If you don't use this `-L` option, instead of seeing the Google homepage, you may (or may not) end up seeing a page that says "The document has moved".
> `-L` tells `curl` to follow redirects to get the actual homepage instead of just returning that intermediate page.

Awesome! We just used `curl` to make a HTTP request (a request using the HTTP protocol) to one of Google's browsers! What *kind* of HTTP request? (Wait, you're thinking, there are different kinds of HTTP requests??? Yesss) It's a **HTTP GET request**. Keep this in mind. We'll return to other types of HTTP requests later. But if you want to build web appliations, you should have some familiarity with HTTP, because HTTP is the main protocol of the Web.

Let's play around with `curl` a bit more. Try getting the TechLadies homepage:

```bash
$ curl www.techladies.co
```

Hmmm, Elisha's name has got to be in there somewhere...

```bash
$ curl www.techladies.co | grep Elisha
```

There we go!

Play around with `curl` a little, read the manpage and look at the various options available, save the output in a file etc. Just get your hands dirty!

## Mini-project

To wrap up our CLI 101, let's do a little mini project! No step by step instructions here; try to figure this out from what we've learnt so far. If you get stuck, the Internet is at your fingertips.

* From your `~/workspace`, create a new directory and name it whatever you like (for convenience, I'll refer to it as `first_dir/`)
* Create three files inside your directory, with some text, and name them whatever you like.
* Create a new directory *inside* the previous directory (inside `first_dir/`. I'll refer to this as `second_dir/`)
* List the files in the `first_dir/` directory and save the output into a file inside the `second_dir/` directory (I'll call this file `listing.txt`)
* Copy the contents of `listing.txt` into a new file in the `first_dir/` directory
* Append the string "TechLadies is awesome!" to one of your files
* Move one of your files from the `first_dir/` directory to the `second/` directory
* Use `curl` to fetch data from some URL of your choice, and save that output to a new file in the `first_dir/` directory
* Use `tree` to visualize your current directory structure, and `grep` to filter by some pattern of your choice

Here is a helpful table of commands:

| Command | Description|
|---------|------------|
| ls | Lists contents of directory or information of file |
| cd | Changes your directory |
| mkdir | Creates a new directory |
| mv | Moves a file. This allows to move a file to a different directory, or rename it to something else. Note that if you move it to an existing filename, it will overwrite that file.
| cp | Copies a file to another file. Note that if you copy to an existing filename, it will overwrite that file.
| cat | Outputs lines of file(s) |
| tree | List contents of directory in tree-like format |
| grep | Filters the given input by matches to a given pattern |
| man | Brings up the manpage for a command |
| curl | Transfers data from a given URL |

And...finally, to subjectively experience and understand the impermanence of this cruel world, we must destroy everything that we've just created ;w;

> **NOTE: YOU ARE ABOUT TO EXECUTE A POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND IRREVERSIBLE COMMAND. PROCEED WITH CAUTION. DON'T MAKE ANY TYPOS**

If we can create new files and directories, surely we can also delete them. Enter the `rm` command. AGAIN, THIS IS A DANGEROUS COMMAND. Files you delete with `rm` are impossible or very difficult to recover.

Now, very carefully, after you've done all your work, go back to the `~/workspace` directory. Now I want you to delete the first new directory you created (`first_dir/`), and all its contents:

```bash
$ rm -r first_dir
```

Yay! Congratulations for completing CLI 101! :D

If you want to learn more about making the command line work for you, [Conquering the Command Line](http://conqueringthecommandline.com/) is an excellent resource.
